well good afternoon everybody
and this is uh talk all about stardust
which may seem like one of the least
interesting
bits of the universe but actually i
think
it is uh probably one of the most
important
as we shall see as we go along there's
also an excuse to show some very lovely
pictures
of some interesting phenomena and the
first one that we're going to look at
is the zodiacal light
if you have a really really clear sky
then
you can sometimes see down towards the
sunset
building up at an angle away the
pillar of light coming up from the
direction of the sun up into the sky and
it will come up
at an angle depending upon where the
plane of the ecliptic the plane in which
the planets orbit the sun
is aligned
so this image is absolutely beautiful
one captured
[Music]
from la silla in chile and uh
you're facing west just after sunset
clouds are all out of the way and you
can see where just where the sunset
light was
and that uh zodiacal light as a kind of
pyramid of light coming up with the
stars behind
there's another fantastic picture of it
here with um these uh
amazing pinnacles of stone in the
foreground
just gives it that uh lovely spooky
appearance
also got a couple of planets visible in
the same plane here look
so the sun's gone down here here's the
zodiacal light
coming up at a slight angle and uh
we've got a jupiter here and i think
this one here is saturn
in the same direction as this line
across the sky where all the planets
live
this of course is our galaxy the milky
way going across
looping across the sky
so what's uh this phenomenon is caused
by is
dust in the plane of the milk
the solar system so all
little tiny bits of dust all orbiting
around the sun in the same
way that the planets do and pretty much
in the same plane
the second phenomena which is actually
caused by the same thing
is the gagan shine and this is a german
word
uh gagan for opposite and shine for
light
it's an opposing light that you see
diametrically opposite the location of
the sun
in the sky and so
if you see this uh faint patch
here this is the gagan shine against the
background of stars
and if you're staring at that then the
sun is directly behind
your line of sight blocked by the earth
and so this is a
also the result of the reflection
of the sunlight back off more of this
amazing interplanetary dust in the plane
of the solar system
and it reflects back off the dust in
this direction opposite the sun
because the particles have the property
uh that like a mirror they
they tend to reflect more of the light
straight back to the source
and so if the sun's directly behind you
then
the particles are the brightest
and you can imagine them all like little
tiny
discs similar to the moon so in this
configuration the moon would be
full because the sun would be directly
behind you
and so you're looking at the fully
illuminated side of the moon
and you're not seeing any of the dark
side
and the same is true for these little
tiny dust particles
you're seeing all of the fully
illuminated side and you can't see any
of the non-illuminated side
that's why they're at their brightest
when they're at this position
at other positions in the sky less of
the
light is being reflected back in your
direction
and scattered to your eye
so just like the uh zodiacal light it's
it's
light coming back to us from this
interplanetary dust
and it causes this bright spot in the
sky
um directly opposite the sun again lined
up with that ecliptic plane
this was first described by uh
a french jesuit astronomer back in the
uh
late 1600s into the 1700s
there's a very few people ever observed
it you needed to
uh really have an excellent skies to be
able to do it i've never seen the gagan
shine
right so something i would like to
actually uh be
out in the desert or something and
hopefully be able to see it from there
now another phenomenon that also
contributes to this
is the lagrange point
l2 so let's have a look at these
lagrange points
we've got the sun and the earth here and
uh the earth moving around its
orbit around like this
and the combined gravity of the
sun and the earth produces this contour
map
of equal lines of gravity so near the
earth they're pretty much dominated by
the earth
likewise near the sun they're dominated
by the sun
but if you reach the point l1
at the right distance between the two
then
they cancel out the force of
attraction to the sun and the force of
attraction to the earth
more or less cancel out and so you get
this
little spot here where you could park a
spacecraft or
indeed a cloud of dust and it would
be at least mostly stable in that
position
that's a fairly obvious one l3
over here is perhaps also fairly obvious
it's like a counterbalance point
where the gravity of the sun and the
earth is all lined up in one direction
so you can imagine there's an orbital
point just over here
that is stable
but slightly curiously there's a
the second lagrange point l2 is
also on that straight line between the
two bodies
but opposite the uh the earth in the sky
and so quite a lot of dust can
park itself in this zone here at l2
and sort of hover there in a semi-stable
position and so that tends to gather in
that spot
and that contributes to that brightness
of that particular portion of the sky
that is diametrically opposite the sun
so you get a cloud of dust here that
creates
some of the gag and shine and then the
rest of it is just
material that is further out along that
line of sight
that is temporarily in in that line
rather than semi-permanently which is
what happens with the duster l2
there are two other lagrange points l4
and l5
60 degrees ahead and 60 degrees behind
the earth
and they're also semi-stable zones in
which
things can accumulate and the earth does
have one or two
uh asteroids that lurk in those l5 and
l4 positions
they're called trojan asteroids if they
live there and they kind of lead and
follow the earth around in its orbit
it's quite curious that uh the effect of
all of the dynamical forces more or less
cancel out at those spots
okay so the big question is where does
all this dust
come from and one obvious
answer is that it's the leftovers from
the formation
of the solar system the uh image to the
right here
is a series of dust rings around
a star other than the sun out there
that will go on eventually to form a
solar system of exoplanets around this
uh
young star that's being formed in the
center there
and you can see the rings be gradually
beginning to form here as
larger objects are accumulating and
beginning to dominate and that's the
growing of a family of planets within
that dust ring
but inevitably there will be a lot of
bits left over because
planet formation is a very very messy
affair
another great source of dust of course
is comets
um and comets i suppose are larger
pieces of the leftover from
the early days of the formation of the
solar system
they're the bits that have not yet
crashed into and become
part of a larger planet
and this is of course they call it hail
bop here
seen back in the 90s one of the best
comets for many years
with its two tails its dust tail in
white
and its ionized blue tail here where
electrons have been knocked off the
atoms
and so the they're electrically charged
and deflected by the sun's magnetic
field
as opposed to just blown backwards by
the uh
pressure of the solar wind and all of
these dust particles will gradually
go into solar orbit and contribute to
that
uh both the zodiacal light and the gagan
shine
we can see that process in action also
on the more recent photograph from uh
comet 67p journeyman of gerasimenko
where the rosetta mission went up
close and into orbit around the comet
and took this amazing
backlit photograph of the comet in the
process
of out gassing these jets of material
emerging from the comet
in different directions creating these
outbursts
and of course the the material from the
comet will go into its tail
and also then go into adding to
all of that dust around the uh
plane of the ecliptic the plane of the
orbit of the comets and the planets
but another source of dust is the
breakup of asteroids
and uh it's an artist's impression of a
collision between
two asteroids and this does happen from
time to time
and of course a very violent process
everything in the solar system
is really moving at quite high speed so
you do tend to get
high velocity impacts creating a
shattering blows
and blowing material in every direction
and
some of that will then just go into
orbit
and become part of the asteroid belt
and part of the contributing factor to
all of the rest of the dust in the solar
system
other bits of it will fall down into the
inner solar system perhaps to land on
earth
and a very good example of that
happened around 460 million years ago
this is a photograph of a cliff
showing banded
layers in the in the uh
geological record where suddenly the
number of meteorites went through the
roof
and this was all caused
as i said 460 million years ago by
some event in the uh asteroid belt
if we look at the amount of uh in
falling material
we reckon to get about 40 000 tons a
year
at the moment of in-falling space dust
coming into the atmosphere as tiny
little particles up through
meteorites and fireballs bringing larger
amounts in
but if we plot the number of impacts
that we know
about over time we get this uh
graph and you mustn't be fooled by the
fact that it seems to get
fewer as we go back in time here this is
the age of the earth from
4 000 million years ago through to now
the reason we have more impact
structures now is because
they get rubbed out by erosion
and weathering and by other geological
processes
so we get a very biased view of the
fact that there are more more young
craters than old ones
um in fact the number of impacts was
greater in the past
and it's falling which is not what you
get from this graph if you just looked
at it
naively but there's this massive
spike here 460 million years ago
where the number of impacts went through
the roof
and the impactors were all of one type
they were all
what we call l chondrite meteorites
various different sizes but all of the
same
overall chemical composition and there's
so many of these l
chondrites they're actually 38 of all
the meteorites on earth
um are this particular type
and the mass of them came
to earth 467 million years ago
as dated by radioactive isotopes
looking at uranium to lead decay
argon decay and other chains all give
the same answer to within around about
200 000 years which is the sort of
level of accuracy of these radioactive
isotope dating
and we think that the
parent body of all of this is asteroid
flora
sir orbits only just beyond the orbit of
mars
and this these are radio image
is of the shape of flora but have been
obtained actually by the arecibo
radio dish which sadly is no more
bouncing radar pulses
off it and managing to create radar
images
um 136 kilometers across its long axis
and uh a nickel iron core with
silicates on the surface and responsible
for at least 13
000 of these fragments that have all
come from
the chemically similar l-chondrite
family of meteorites
known as the flora family
um we've got sorry 13 000 asteroids that
we know
have this same composition and share
similar orbital characteristics so it
seems that
flora is the largest member of this
family of about 13 000 separate
asteroids
and they all have the same composition
as these l-chondrite meteorites
flora is about 80 percent of the total
mass
the next largest one is ariadne
and that's nine percent and then gasper
which was visited by the galileo
spacecraft is another one
so we think that there was a larger
parent body possibly
a small planetoid in the process of
growing
and became shattered and blown to pieces
and we see the resulting chaos and
fragments
out there in the asteroid belt and the
huge rush of material all came to earth
around about the same time
it was responsible for a significant
extinction event in fact
now here's another image of a
proto-planetary disk
around another star here
we've got a simulation on the left of
what we might expect
from our physics for a planet forming in
a disk around another star
and an actual photograph of the process
going on
showing what looks a bit like a spiral
galaxy but it's just a spiraling of
the material in the protoplanetary disk
so a very thick amount of dust and
material
going on to form planets but also
spiraling
uh into these structures so why do we
get these spiral structures and uh
what's going on well there's an effect
called the poynting robertson effect
which affects everything but it
particularly
affects dust particles uh
by far the most now because there are
other effects that
are more significant for other sizes of
object
what happens is that dust particles that
are orbiting around
in the solar system are forced
to gradually spiral in towards the sun
and it's the effect of sunlight on them
it causes them to lose angular momentum
and thereby fall on to
ever decreasing orbits therefore
spiraling in
large particles it's uh
much less significant than it is for
small particles and that's because large
particles
the larger something is the more mass it
has
per unit of surface area and this is all
about the surface
area catching the sunlight
but also because of this spiraling
inwards
eventually the material if it doesn't
hit a planet first
then it will fall into the sun and
that's why
the fact that we see the zodiacal cloud
at the moment
means that it is continually being
refreshed
so it's regenerated from the comets
and asteroids but let me try and explain
why
sunlight causes thing to to fall into
the sun
it's a little bit complicated but i've
got some diagrams
and we're going to first of all try and
answer the question where is the sun
now and you might think that's an
entirely trivial question because you
can just point at it
um but you'd be slightly off actually
so here's the earth moving along its
orbit and the sun
here and we know that sunlight takes
eight minutes and 20 seconds to cross
the gap
okay 150 million kilometers
one astronomical unit so what happens is
that our beam of light leaves the sun
here
and it sets off towards the earth but of
course the earth is moving
so a little bit later we have this
situation
um and excuse my very rough diagram here
here we go and you can see the earth is
attempting to move in a
uh orbit rather than a straight line so
the direction of movement is changing
as it moves around the sun and the beam
of light comes along
and hits the earth good well that's
obvious isn't it
and it's taken 8 minutes and 20 seconds
to do so
but where's the sun now
well actually it's over there it's at
right angles to the direction of
the the orbit assuming we're in a nearly
circular orbit
which is what my diagram is trying to
show
but you see it you see the light as if
it's come from
this point here we're going around
the uh circular orbit here the center
of that circle is here where the sun
actually is
but for the light beam to have hit us
it must have traveled in this slightly
diagonal
fashion and that's not entirely obvious
in fact
it's a very important
factor in the whole of um discussing
einstein's relativity that uh
you have to take account of where things
appear to be
um and this angle between where the
light appears to arrive and your
your line of sight gradually closes up
the faster you go
so the if if you were orbiting more
quickly you would see
the line of sight to the sun
at an even more acute angle than my
diagram shows there
only if you're stationary would you
measure the angle as
a right angle why does that matter
what's that got to do with dust well
try and show it in this diagram this is
our
dust particle now and we've got the
sunlight coming in
from that slightly acute angle and what
happens is it hits the
the dust particle and it warms it up
and then the dust particle re-radiates
the uh heat as infrared
but the dust particle re-radiates it
equally in all directions
from the point of view of the particle
but if you take that point of view as if
you were the sun
then the sun's rays are traveling in
straight and the
infrared light appears to be coming off
at an angle
tilted towards the direction of motion
of the
dust particle in the same way
you see the sun being tilted towards the
direction
the sun sees your heat being tilted
towards that direction
and slightly more of it coming off at an
angle
another way of thinking about it is that
you're seeing the sunlight hit you
more from the front and then
a simple everyday version of this
explanation is
imagine you go outside in the rain and
you
run and the rain is coming straight down
upon
your head well if you were to stand
still the top of your head would get wet
but if you run forwards then your front
gets wet
as well because of the rain
falling in front of you and you catch up
and hit it so you can think of it like
that
but it the front side of the moving
object
gets more of the incoming uh
solar radiation and that very very
slightly
slows it down because it's uh giving it
a partial
push backwards and resisting the motion
around the orbit and that's why the dust
spirals inwards it gradually
loses momentum and therefore falls in
towards the sun
this is a picture from uh the cassini
spacecraft
of dust and the dusty rings around
saturn
and it's the day the earth smile because
uh i believe
this little dot here is the earth
and uh they arranged to take this
photograph and tell everybody
that uh there we are a little arrow not
marking it out
but the uh everybody should turn their
face
up to the sky and smile of course half
the people on the earth would have been
looking in the wrong direction at that
point because
they would have been on the other side
of the earth but at least half of the
population was perhaps able to smile in
the direction of this photograph
but the point really is that we we
normally see
the main parts of saturn's rings here
but this photograph reveals the
dusty nature of the e-ring here
and this further outer uh
ring here which is associated with the
the moonlet called phoebe and this is
dust in orbit around saturn and
it too will eventually lose angular
momentum and
fall inwards and rain down
onto the planet you know the rings are
only a temporary
phenomenon we don't know how long
they've been there but this is just like
the whole of the solar system
in miniature really with uh the moons
taking the place of planets
and the rings being like the zodiacal
dust that we have in the plane of the
solar system
bringing it back a little bit closer to
earth though actually
a very interesting thing that i
discovered in researching this
was the cordoloosky clouds we're going
back to those lagrange points again
and the l4 and l5 points
not of the earth's orbit around the sun
but of the moon's orbit around the earth
so here instead of the sun and the earth
we've got the earth
and the moon and we have the same
arrangement of lagrange points
but it turns out that um
these l4 and l5 points
do indeed contain collections of
space dust uh orbiting around sharing
the moon's orbit
but leading and following it and it
wouldn't surprise
me if we don't discover the same at l1
and l2 because they're a bit more
difficult to observe because
l1 is always directly in the line of
sight of the moon
and l2 is obscured by the moon but
with spacecraft perhaps we could get a
different angle on it and find a way of
discovering that
now these uh clouds they were first
reported in 1961 by the polish
astronomer
called ilewski but they've only just
been confirmed by observations in 2018
and there's a paper published that i was
reading uh just
a couple of months ago about this that
made me get
very interested in looking at all this
space dust
because one of the potential sources of
this
dust is that it's leftovers from the
formation of the moon
the moon was probably formed in orbit
round the earth as a result of a giant
impact between the earth
and another body that's hypothetically
given the name fear
and smashed into the earth blasted lots
of material
into earth orbit part of the body of the
proto-earth
and the thea impactor merged
leaving a lot of material scattered
around
most of which went to form the moon but
could well perhaps have formed a number
of
separate moonlets to begin with and
eventually
only the main moon that we see today is
the surviving predator
plus these bits of dust that are trapped
at l4 and l5 so they would be very
interesting to investigate from the
point of view of a sample return mission
because we could perhaps find ways of
dating them and understanding
if this theory about the moon's
formation really does hold true
now we talked about dust rings around
other
stars other than the sun this is the
coronagraph image of
former hult a and a huge
dust ring around it the coronagraph has
blotted out
the central image of the star here and
we've painted in a little dot
just for reference that's where the star
would be but the
obscuring disc in the telescope has
blotted out most of the light from the
star
and revealed the enormous dust ring
around formal a
now a few years ago back in 2004 2005
they spotted a lump of this uh
moving around together which was
identified as as a planet um
going around or proto planets going
around the star
and tracked its movement through this
disc as it was accumulating material
but the latest news is it appears to
have vanished so
either it was just an accumulation of
dust rather than
an individual solid object and has now
dissipated
or there's been an almighty collision
and the proto planet was destroyed and
scattered
sadly we didn't catch it in the act to
see what happened
but of course all of this space dust is
very very tiny indeed
one micrometer shown on the diagram here
this is some space dust collected
by um one of the sample return missions
uh the stardust mission collected
material in
an aerogel it was attempted to be
parachuted back down to earth and caught
by a helicopter
but very famously the parachute didn't
deploy
and so the whole thing came plummeting
to earth but they did get
some samples of interplanetary dust from
it
and they have this amazing structure you
can see how
there are lots and lots of little tiny
globules
that have all gradually stuck together
in this amazing
uh the complicated shape with all these
little tiny nooks and crannies
in there very very porous material
very easy for gases and molecules to
find their way into these
crevices now here's the picture i have
of the disappearing planet so there we
are 2004 and 2006
former halt b and then it it went away
sorry that slide was in the wrong order
but the reason i was mentioning these
these discs like this is
because we think that the
process of um separation
occurs according to the volatility of
different
materials this is an artist's impression
of
a system in the constellation of orion
v83
where the detection has been made of a
young star
in its t tory stage in the middle here
with the protoplanetary disk
but they've caught it at the point where
the heat coming from the star
has blown away all of the volatile
materials particularly the water
h2o out beyond the snow
line this is where the temperature
finally
drops as you move away from the heat
source
back down to the freezing point of water
and so the h2o snows out and
as snow and ice beyond this sometimes
called the snow line or the ice line
around the star and this was all
theoretical
in the in the past it leaves the dirty
dusty
metal bearing mineral grains behind
that go on to form rocky planets in the
inner part of your
brand new solar system but it leaves all
the volatile
ices the water the ammonia the methane
all these uh things that are uh very
easy to boil away
out in the cold part of the solar system
and so v83 uranus is confirming
that that separation process that we
thought happens really does exist
in terms of these interplanetary
grains of material
now if we're looking out beyond the
solar system out into what goes on not
on the interplanetary scale but
in the interstellar space then we
really have to rely on just a couple of
sources of information
one is our intrepid spacecraft the
voyagers and of course the pioneers that
have left the solar system
and gone out beyond now the reach of
the sun's influence means the solar wind
gradually slows down and loses its
momentum
as it's climbing away from the gravity
well of the sun
to the point where the pressure from the
interstellar medium
overwhelms it causes it to stop so you
get the
termination shock and then the outer
heliosphere there which is compressed in
the direction of movement of the sun
and extended like a cometary tail in
some ways
along the path of the sun through this
interstellar medium
i think voyager 1 crossed the
heliosphere
out into inter stellar space
in august of 2012 and voyager 2 followed
through
into that maybe that same journey
and crossed just two years ago in 2018
so they're now both out there making
measurements and still returning data
of what's going on in the interstellar
space
and there were some results just the
other day of them reporting that the
pressure of material out there although
it's still
incredibly low by earthly standards was
higher than we were expecting so they're
still doing good
science
now of course out there between the
stars
well away from the earth we have a lot
of these uh
lovely interstellar clouds of gas and
dust that
gravity is getting hold off everything
attracts
everything else by gravity pulls it in
and provided it's cold enough so that
it's not
zipping around at high speed then the
gravity can
bring it together and collapse it to
make
new discs of material
new stars in the center and new planets
in the
outer regions and this of course is a
fantastic photograph of
the orion nebula here where that process
is going
on and some hot young blue stars in the
center here
but look at all of the the dust in the
outer reaches
this is the running man nebula over here
really they're all part of the same
enormous amount of uh material that's
scattered throughout
the orion region
now that's uh caught in the act after
the stars have formed and
the light from the stars is what's
making the gas
now shine making it visible to us
but we also get these lovely dark
nebulae this is barnard 68 as it says on
the screen
beautiful dark jelly bean shaped
accumulation of very very cold dust and
gas
out there you can see a few
highly reddened stars through it that's
because the longer wavelength red light
is more able to penetrate through the
dust and so round the fringes of the
cloud where
it's not quite blocking all of the light
it's mostly the red that manages to get
through so you see those
highly reddened stars around the edge
but in the center there
the uh there's enough dust to completely
block our line of sight
to the stars beyond
now this is still fairly thin there is
probably close to a vacuum by earthly
standards
so very very thin indeed at this stage
but it's many light years thick
and so it is able to add up to enough to
block the light
but if you watch closely what happens to
barnard 68
over many many hundreds of millions of
years
first of all it would shrink and
collapse and
then some regions inside it would get
dense enough
for new stars to be born and it would
then
turn into something looking a bit more
like the orion nebula
here's an intermediate kind of stage
this is the very famous horsehead nebula
and here we have another of these dark
nebulae these dark
clouds a bit like the barnard 68
but a little more highly evolved and
one or two of these objects that we're
seeing
inside the dark material here are new
solar systems just beginning to light up
once they have been lit up for a while
the solar radiation tends to blow away
most of the remaining gas and switch off
the star forming process
but you can see how uh that's still
fairly dense
there in the horse head nebula a lot of
dust there
another lovely picture of the orion
nebula we're going to dive right inside
it
um you know in a moment but there is a
glorious
photograph of it with the trapezium
right in the center those
very famous four stars that are
primarily what's lighting up most of
this
inner part of the core of the orion
nebula
and blowing a huge bubble in the center
of it
but if we dive right into these nebulae
with the hubble space telescope
we see these dark
bits of nebula left over so-called bach
globules named after another dutch
astronomer who first identified them
these are dust where the density of the
dust is sufficiently high still
that it's keeping the heat out from its
own core and keeping the temperature
down
enough that these are still contracting
whereas
it's embedded in rather warmer material
that's illuminated by
the ultraviolet light of all of the new
stars that have been born
out of the original nebula and so you
find these throughout things like the
orion nebula
and others most famously
this photograph taken by the hubble
space telescope
of uh the central core of the eagle
nebula m16
called the pillars of creation here
these
enormous towers of dust and material
are forming new stars within them
there's very
good example there and a couple on the
tip
right up here we're going to look at
where we can really see the bok globules
forming you can see the material being
boiled away from the edges that's the
influence of
all of the uh stars that have already
lit up
out of this uh nascent star cluster
and the light is driving away the outer
layers
but the outer layers are sacrificial the
inner layers are
protected by them and so the temperature
inside is still low enough
that continuing collapse can happen
now we can look at this again but use
the infrared
so on the left we have the visible
picture of the uh
pillars of creation if we use infrared
light we can see deeper into the
structure of them
and indeed right through in some cases
we definitely detect stars
that are embedded within the structure
here
that are it forming new solar systems
but if we zoom right in on the tip of
the tower there
here we see these bok globules again
look at these around here
and on the top here
we've got this amazing uh structure
where
a new solar system is being formed right
here
and the star is whizzing around rotating
and
as material is then falling in towards
it it's getting whipped up
into a jet and there's a jet going out
along the polar spin axes in both
directions
and here's a shock wave where the jet
is impacting part of the nebula and the
more of these
you look for the more of them you can
find
there's another jet coming here look
and actually if you zoom in on some of
these other regions you'll find more and
more of these
jets of material from these forming
new solar systems and so
the cosmic recycling is constantly going
on here
of course the other end of the life
cycle of stars is when they run out of
fuel
and very large stars will explode and
then they
throw material all out around
the cosmos and that contributes to the
next generation
of uh interstellar dust
so here's a good example of a supernova
remnants
deep in the core of the
galaxy sagittarius
stars that are in the process of dying
here also
throw out large amounts of dust this is
v838 monocerotis it's not a supernova
um it's a wolf reyette star a very very
large star 40 times the mass of the sun
and we now see the
surface of this star made of helium
it's but so hot that it's blasted its
outer hydrogen envelope away
and taken with it an awful lot of dust
that is forming into
this cloud around it that's being driven
away
by its uh immense solar wind so a very
extreme
example of what we might call a
planetary nebula
this is the helix nebula a very famous
but a much smaller star this has formed
a white dwarf in the middle here
and we see the expanding material that's
been blown away from it
surrounding it so that will go on to
re-seed
and create new families of
stars and planets out of this dust
well that's interesting
but uh very curious behavior from
powerpoint there for a moment
anyway this was the next slide that i
was aiming for
and this is a little diagram of some of
those
clouds that are surrounding us and our
neighboring stars
so a map on a scale that you might not
see very often
it's uh 20 light years in either
direction
with us in the center and the
sun here is moving around the galaxy
in the direction of the orange arrow
through what's called the local cloud
of material which is all moving in a
different direction
as indicated by the various blue arrows
so there's a certain amount of chaotic
motion here there's
uh the arrows are broadly from the
bottom
right to the top left but by no means
all
consistent but it's definitely not the
orbital direction
of the sun
and a lot of this local cloud is
relatively
hot uh 7000 degrees
but very very thinly uh spaced so
uh one atom in every three cubic
centimeters
of uh space that's not as
dense as uh
uh it is inside the solar system but
it's still more dense
than the average across the galaxy which
is only
actually three atoms for every uh cubic
meter
so rel it's a thousand times more dense
than
the typical interstellar material
now the sun entered the edge of this uh
local cloud
somewhere between fifty thousand and
hundred and fifty thousand years ago
and it's gonna as you can see by the
direction it's gonna move
out again into this gap in about another
ten to twenty thousand years so perhaps
the current
time that we're living in is a little
bit different
from earlier and near future times
um but again it's going to change again
as it enters
this uh in perhaps differently
structured
cloud that's moving in a slightly
different direction
so what's with all of this flow from
this direction here from the direction
of alpha centauri
and this way well actually
this is the direction of a uh
constellation called scorpio um
down towards the center of our galaxy
and a lot of material is moving out from
that direction
due to the presence of some very very
powerful star clusters of huge stars
and that have formed out of shots down
here
and quite a few of them have gone
through their life cycle and exploded
and so there's been a series of
supernovae
in this direction and that's created
these shock waves that are blowing all
of this gas
across the line of the uh motion of the
sun's orbit
let's have a look at that in slightly
more detail so here's the sun moving
through the local cloud
as i said it's going to exit the local
cloud and then move into the g
clouds it's moving across this line of
sight from
alpha centauri and the the centaurus
cloud supernova complex down here
and all of that material is coming
across our line of sight
so it's much more complicated than
one might have imagined
another way to look at that is on an
even larger scale so
now that region is all in here
on the sort of region out to betelgeuse
here
at uh 500 light years away
and um
antares and so on
what we think of as those local clouds
actually
inside a relatively under dense region
called the local bubble
that is then surrounded by more dense
regions
so the structure even at these scales is
immensely complicated with
um our region not necessarily being
typical
of all of the rest of what's going on in
the galaxy
we're only just beginning to understand
all of this
if we look a little bit further afield
still we get to the gould belt
where the stars and star-forming regions
around us
um around about 3 000 light years in
diameter
and it seems to be
a ring of stars in the milky way that's
tilted at an angle to the
main plane of the galaxy and contains a
very large number
of those very hot o and b class stars
it may be that it's all part of this
spiral arms
and the uh star-forming regions
of the orion arm and we are about 325
light years away from it
that's a good job without far away from
it because all of those uh
o and b class stars are good candidates
for
future supernovae and so we wouldn't
really want to be any closer than that
i've got another diagram that kind of
shows that on a galactic scale
um we've got the different
spiral arms the perseus arm the
sagittarius
arm and this is the orion spur
and we are
just here
not far from where the orion spur
actually joins the uh sagittarius arm
that's about 6 000 light years down
there
this is uh subject of a future talk of
mine cygnus
x1 and the cygnus ob
star region again a lot of very large
stars and some supernovae
and there's the orion nebula look
it's all of these familiar objects the
rosette nebula
out in the perseus arm
so huge amounts of all of this dust and
gas
along the spiral arms and we're just in
the edge of it
inside the local bubble inside the g
cloud in there so it's very very
unevenly distributed
quite incredible how much rich structure
there is
to all of this
and here's a couple of images of our
neighboring galaxy showing the same
thing going on there we have
uh andromeda two and a half million
light years away from us
the bottom image is optical and the top
image is infrared
and the infrared reveals where the dust
is again
all of this huge amounts of dust in the
spiral arms
and these interstellar grains we've
managed to sample
some of those they're similar but not
entirely the same as the interplanetary
particles a little bit more compacted
but still full of all of these lovely
little pockets why do i say lovely
little pockets well
it's the the chemist in me that knows
that
if you have a structure like this it has
a very very
large surface area and surfaces in
chemistry
are a really good place for reactions to
take place
and so these interstellar and
interplanetary grains
are hugely important to
my understanding and to the
understanding that we all gain of how
complex molecules can form out there
amongst the stars
normally in outer space there's an
enormous amount of ultraviolet radiation
we're protected from it on earth by the
overlying ozone layer and our atmosphere
but the conditions beyond the atmosphere
are very harsh
and molecules like hydrogen h2 here
will get hit by the ultraviolet
radiation
and split up into two separate atoms
but in the presence of an interstellar
grain
they can hide either behind
on the far side where they're out of
view in the shadow
or more likely they find their way into
all the nooks and crannies
inside the grains and in there there's a
nice protected environment they can
perhaps be split up by the ultraviolet
light
find their way into the grains and stick
to the surface
and they're just waiting then for
another molecule to come along
and they can then react with it
and form all sorts of interesting
combinations of different
molecules and here is a
meteorite that has come to earth and
proved this for us because
inside the nooks and crannies of this
we discovered a protein called
hemolithine
and hemolithin is a complex protein
containing
lots of amino acids all joined together
uh including some metals that have been
incorporated within it iron and lithium
and most of the interesting enzymes that
we have in biology
are metal containing proteins and so
it's quite incredible to just think that
these little
grains out there are little chemical
factories
that are producing every possible
flavor of uh combinations of
organic material with metals added quite
at random
but if they produce enough of them and
then they may get lucky and produce
something interesting and in fact one of
the
discoveries on this particular meteorite
was
the sugar ribose as well
and ribose is the r in
rna so a very very important
precursor to the formation of the
chemistry of life
so i think the more we study these
interstellar grains
and the chemistry that goes on on them
the more we might learn about how
some of those first steps along the
chemical
biochemical pathway to life might well
have formed out there
in all of these particles and of course
then
if they fall to a fertile planet like
the earth
then the rest is history but they will
be raining down
on pretty much every uh body in the
solar system and beyond
is the implication and that has huge uh
significance for
life across the cosmos and with that
i shall finish thank you very much
indeed for listening
i hope you've got the idea that uh
actually is a lot more to
space dust than just something that
blocks our viewers astronomers